---
title: "Education"
hero_img_fore: "/assets/content/communication/splash_fore.png"
hero_img_back: "/assets/content/communication/splash_back.png"
summary: "Education is an important part of our project and therefore we wanted to focus on further sharing information on the field of synthetic biology and iGEM overall. We created educational resources aimed to individuals from 11 years to university students as well as working closely in hosting science student placements. Overall, by working with a range of iGEM teams across the timeframe of our project we were able to collaborate on a range of projects as well as share educational resources and knowledge at the same time."
date: 2021-09-07T14:59:05+01:00
draft: false
---

## iGEM Collective Magazine

Education is a key aspect of iGEM Warwick’s work this year. The importance of
sharing knowledge, creating resources, and educating the next generation of
students on the vast array of topics within Synthetic Biology is paramount.

Our aim was exactly that, to create educational resources to share knowledge and
teach others about the field of Synthetic Biology. We believed the best way to
do this was to create an IGEM Collective Magazine which would contain entries
from a range of iGEM teams globally describing their project, the importance of
synthetic biology to their project, the impact of their project and a research
task. We wanted to introduce to students 16–18-year-olds who would be embarking
on their KS5 qualification (pre university), the vast application synthetic
biology has and the solutions it can create to aid the current real-world
issues. With the wide breadth of IGEM teams who submitted unique tasks, the
magazine allows students to further develop their knowledge on a wide range of
synthetic biology topics. The free flow nature of the magazine encourages
independent learning and allows students to research the topics that interest
them the most. We believe this encourages students to pursue their own passion
while experiencing self-driven study which lays the groundwork for higher level
education.

IGEM Warwick initially reached out to IGEM teams via a campaign on social media
platforms including Facebook, Twitter, Instagram. We created a google form which
contained 4 questions for teams to complete which was made available via our
social media platforms and by direct request. We collated the information from
the forms and dedicated a page to each team in the booklet and simplified some
terms and description in order to adapt it to our target audience
(16–18-year-olds). We included a brief introduction page describing iGEM ,
synthetic biology and aim of the booklet furthermore we also had a tracker page
where students could highlight each IGEM team name when they have completed
their task. At the end of the booklet there was a certificate of achievement
which the student can fill in themselves as evidence that they have completed
the research tasks in the booklet. This booklet was distributed to widening
participation school in and around Coventry which is the city the University of
Warwick is based in. It was made available to teachers in school via a [monthly
newsletter created by the Outreach team at the department of Science,
Engineering and Maths and is also available to access on their
website](https://www.canva.com/design/DAEilsL-k1M/75ZTPjU7mcVP7iwn9TrXkQ/view).

A second version of the booklet was created which was unedited therefore was not
simplified and was made available to members of BIOSOC (University of Warwick
Life Sciences Society). This was made available on their website alongside an
article on aim of booklet and iGEM overall. [Research and Internships | Warwick
BioSoc](https://warwickbiosoc.wixsite.com/website/research-internships)

The booklet was also distributed to all teams which participated so they could
share the resource in their country and with schools local to their university.

Overall, the booklet contained entries from 20 teams over the 3 different
continents (Asia, Europe, North America).

## Nuffield Placement Students

The importance of sharing knowledge and providing support for the next cohort of
university of students was another important educational aspect to iGEM Warwick.
Therefore, we contacted Nuffield Foundation to express an interest in hosting
students (16–18-year-olds) to complete a research project with iGEM Warwick. We
were able to host 2 students in July for 2 weeks to assist them on their
research essay and research poster. As this was their first introduction to
academic writing and posters in this manner, we hosted biweekly meetings as well
as extra meetings if needed to assist them in the process. This included helping
them to understand scientific terminology they have not come across before in
research papers, introducing them to referencing and the basic backbone of a
research paper as well as advising them on where to find resources. We also
attended presentations given by our primary PI Dr Christopher Corre on different
topics they could base their research on, including antibiotic resistance and
natural sunscreens based on marine life. We also hosted presentations on
different iGEM Warwick team projects from 2016-2021 to allow them to start
exploring the range of applications Synthetic Biology has and what area they may
want to focus their research on.

{{< centeredImage
        src="/assets/content/communication/nuffieldStudentsMeeting.png"
        alt="A meeting with the Nuffield placement students"
        caption="A meeting with the Nuffield placement students" >}}

## Educational Resources

Using our social media pages such as Instagram we spread the awareness of other
IGEM Team educational projects such as iGEM KCL and we also made available via
our social media pages educational posters.

### Social Media

From early March we decided to use social media to gain advice and knowledge on
our project idea as well as use it as a platform to network with a range of iGEM
teams globally. We had from June – August virtual meetups to discuss our project
development and ideas with teams such as iGEM KCL , iGEM Mingdao  , iGEM
Stonybrook to name a few. We gained useful insights into how to improve our wiki
as well which direction to go in when working on human practices and the type of
individuals we should contact which we acted on. Furthermore, through our social
media pages we were able to be involved in many collaborative projects such as
in June with McMaster iGEM team where we worked with them on an educational song
to iGEM Aix Marseille in September for their emoji project game on Instagram
where we shared details of our project on their social media platforms.

{{< centeredImage
        src="/assets/content/communication/socialMediaStory.png"
        alt="A social media 'story' for outreach on Instagram"
        caption="A social media 'story' for outreach on Instagram" >}}

### Educational Posters

At iGEM Warwick we created educational posters on different topics such as
Microorganisms in hospitals, PCR, Carbapenem resistance Enterobacteriaceae and
ethics in synthetic biology. This was made available by filling out a google
form via a link on our social media pages for teams to provide their email
address in order for us to send the posters to them. This will allow them to
have access the poster in PDF form in English for them use in their own
educational campaigns when working with schools or to send to schools and
teachers to distribute to their students. The posters are basic introductions in
to topics with short bursts of information in order for it to be easier to
understand by our target audience which is 11-15 years old.

{{< carousel caption="A carousel of the posters designed" >}}
- /assets/content/communication/PCRtestingPoster.png, A poster about PCR
- /assets/content/communication/CREposter.png, A poster about CRE
- /assets/content/communication/microOrgsInHospitalsPoster.png, A poster about microorganisms in hospitals
- /assets/content/communication/ethicsSynBioPoster.png, A poster about ethics in synthetic biology
{{</ carousel >}}

Our aim for education was to make synthetic biology knowledge accessible to a
wide range of students at different stages of their academic learning.  We
believe we have achieved this by using posters, booklets, social media and by
hosting students personally as well as involving a range of iGEM teams so that
they can also further spread the resources and knowledge of biology and the
topic of synthetic Biology even further in their own countries.

## LMSU FEM Club

LMSU hosted a Fem club talk and invited those who identified as Female from iGEM
Warwick Team to attend. In the talk we discussed our projects, issues females
face working in science how our countries are working towards tackling issues
females face as well as improving inclusivity of females in STEM fields and
opportunities for females to work and study STEM. We went through issues faced
by females in the UK, Switzerland and Russia as well as solutions and changes
occurring. This was a fantastic opportunity to learn more from different teams
about educational opportunities for females, as well as share ideas on what
should be done to make STEM fields more open to females.

{{< centeredImage
        src="/assets/content/communication/LMSUFEMClub.png"
        alt="A meeting of the LMSU FEM club"
        caption="A meeting of the LMSU FEM club" >}}

## Welcome Week Talk

iGEM Warwick were invited on the 30th of September to present in front of the
new 1st year Life sciences cohort at the University of Warwick about the iGEM
Competition and our project for 2021. We prepared a presentation prior to the
date and presented virtually through Microsoft teams. The aim was to introduce
the competition to students and encourage them to get involved with iGEM, as
well as explain our project this year, ranging from the lab and modelling work
to the outreach and collaboration work we accomplished. We wanted to show them
all the aspects which make up the iGEM competition and the range of topics
present in the field of Synthetic Biology. The students had not been exposed to
Synthetic Biology nor iGEM and so the intention of our presentation was to give
them a taste of the wonderful world of Synthetic Biology and iGEM.  Hopefully
this helped develop curiosity towards Synthetic Biology and perhaps encouraged
them to consider the possibility of working within the field in the future.
