---
title: "Planning"
hero_img_fore: "/assets/content/planning/splash_fore.png"
hero_img_back: "/assets/content/planning/splash_back.png"
toc: false
summary: "A brief summary of the content of the page"
date: 2021-08-26T11:45:31+01:00
draft: false
---

{{< timeline_start >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

## Our first strong idea

{{< timeline_content >}}

In late March we came up with our first strong idea for our project – a product
which could be sprayed onto a surface in a hospital and cause any
disinfectant-resistant bacteria to fluoresce. After discussing this in our
weekly meetings, the idea was liked by the whole team but after researching the
idea and discussing our findings, we realised that this was not a major issue in
hospitals when compared to antibiotic resistance. We also moved from a
spray-based to a swab-based approach around this time.

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

Detection of CRE and biosensors

{{< timeline_content >}}

After further research from break out groups and speaking to various health
professionals (see our [human practices](/Human_Practices) page for more
information) we came across a [Public Health England report about the concerning
rise in CRE infections](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/926563/Framework_of_actions_to_contain_CPE-draft.pdf.

Current detection methods for CRE require a lab and take 4-5 days for a sample
to be processed. This can lead to large outbreaks in hospitals, due to a delay
in results. We decided to think about how we could design a rapid detection
method which would be used by cleaning staff without training, and which would
eliminate the need for a lab. If carbapenem resistant bacteria were present on a
swab, the sample would fluoresce to indicate a positive result.

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

## Developing our idea on how to detect CRE

{{< timeline_content >}}

We started to plan who we might need to contact, in order to begin designing how
this detection method might work. We contacted microbiologists and specialists
within the University of Warwick to allow us to gain a better understanding of
how to tackle this problem.

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

## Meeting with Dr Freya Harrison

{{< timeline_content >}}

Dr Harrison is a specialist on carbapenem resistance, who we contacted to learn
about the best ways of targeting these bacteria. We were advised to look at
broad spectrum detection, and the possibility of using specific phages of
peptidoglycan layer tagging. We also learnt a lot about the importance of
looking at the infectious dose, how carbapenem resistance spreads, and issues
surrounding biofilms

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

## Meeting with Dr Antonia Sagona

{{< timeline_content >}}

Dr Sagona is a phage therapy specialist who we contacted about the possibility
of using phages. We discovered that this would likely be too specific, as we
would only be able to target one strain of carbapenem resistant bacteria. This
would be of limited use in a hospital, due to the wide range of different
carbapenem resistant _Enterobacteriaceae_.

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

## Identifying our target gene

{{< timeline_content >}}

After reading extensively around the subject of CRE, we came across a gene
called OXA-48, which we decided we would select as our target. This is because
there aren’t currently any existing methods which can detect this gene either
efficiently or quickly. If this gene was present in a bacterial cell, this would
enable us to identify that the bacterium was resistant to carbapenems. In our
next weekly meeting, we also decided that we wanted to use a CRISPR-based
approach in order to accurately identify the presence of this gene in an
organism.

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

## Meeting with Dr Richard Hastings

{{< timeline_content >}}

Dr Hastings is the Healthcare Regulatory and Technical Manager at
[Mirius](https://www.mirius.com/), a company producing disinfectants and other
cleaning solutions. He informed us of all the legal restrictions and regulations
surrounding the use of biological products on humans, which was of great
interest to us as it meant we moved away from designing a rapid detection method
to diagnose patients, due to the many logistical difficulties. We instead
decided a way of containing the spread of CRE by targeting reservoirs like sinks
would be more achievable for us, and we would be able to do it more effectively.

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_title >}}

## Meetings with Jack Lawrence

{{< timeline_content >}}

We met with Jack Lawrence, a member of the 2018 iGEM, to discuss the use of
CRISPR to detect carbapenem resistance. This was an extremely productive
meeting, as we designed the gRNAs we would use to allow the dCas9 protein to
bind to our target gene (OXA-48) using NUPACK. Soon after, we had a second
meeting where we designed the plasmids we wanted to engineer in order to get
this system working. We made a rough step-by-step plan of how we would achieve
this in the lab. Once the correct parts had been ordered, we were ready to start
in the lab and get the project underway!

{{< div_end >}}

{{< timeline_end >}}
